### Installing Dependencies

> Before installing Sponge, you need to install two dependencies: `go` and `protoc`.

**✅ Installing go**

Download go from: [https://studygolang.com/dl](https://studygolang.com/dl)

> Required version: 1.16 or above. Add the directory containing the binary files generated by the `go install` command (usually $GOPATH/bin) to the system environment variable "path".

Check go version: `go version`

<br>

**✅ Installing protoc**

Download protoc from: [https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases/tag/v3.20.3](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases/tag/v3.20.3)

> Required version: v3.20 or above. Add the directory containing the protoc binary file (recommended: $GOPATH/bin) to the system environment variable "path".

Check protoc version: `protoc --version`

<br>

After installing go and protoc, proceed to install Sponge. Sponge can be installed on Windows, macOS, and Linux environments.

<br>
<br>

### Linux or macOS Environment

```bash
# Install Sponge
go install github.com/zhufuyi/sponge/cmd/sponge@latest

# Initialize Sponge, automatically install Sponge's dependency plugins
sponge init

# Check if all plugins have been successfully installed. If any plugins fail to install, retry with the command: sponge tools --install
sponge tools

# Check Sponge version
sponge -v
```

<br>
<br>

### Windows Environment

> In the Windows environment, you need to install mingw64, make, and cmder to support the Linux command environment required by Sponge.

**✅ Installing mingw64**

Download mingw64 from: [x86_64-8.1.0-release-posix-seh-rt_v6-rev0.7z](https://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw-w64/files/Toolchains%20targetting%20Win64/Personal%20Builds/mingw-builds/8.1.0/threads-posix/seh/x86_64-8.1.0-release-posix-seh-rt_v6-rev0.7z)

After downloading, extract it to the directory `D:\Program Files\mingw64`, and add the directory containing frequently used Linux commands, such as `D:\Program Files\mingw64\bin`, to the system environment variable "PATH".

<br>

**✅ Installing the make command**

Navigate to the directory `D:\Program Files\mingw64\bin`, find the executable file `mingw32-make.exe`, and copy and rename it to `make.exe`.

Check make version: `make -v`

<br>

**✅ Installing cmder**

Download cmder from: [cmder-v1.3.20.zip](https://github.com/cmderdev/cmder/releases/download/v1.3.20/cmder.zip)

After downloading, extract it to the directory `D:\Program Files\cmder`, and add the directory `D:\Program Files\cmder` to the system environment variable "PATH".

Perform basic configuration for cmder:

- **Configure Right-Click Launch for cmder**: Press the `win+x` key combination, then press the letter `a` to enter the administrative terminal. Execute the command `Cmder.exe /REGISTER ALL`. Right-click in any folder and choose `Cmder Here` to open the cmder interface.
- **Resolve Space Issue While Typing Commands**: Open the cmder interface, press `win+alt+p` to access the settings, search for `Monospace` in the upper left corner, uncheck it, and save and exit.

> ⚠ When developing projects with Sponge in a Windows environment, to avoid issues with missing Linux commands, please use cmder instead of the built-in cmd terminal, the terminal in Goland, or the terminal in VS Code.

Open the `cmder.exe` terminal and check if common Linux commands are supported.

```bash
ls --version
make --version
cp --version
chmod --version
rm --version
```

<br>

**✅ Installing Sponge**

Open the `cmder.exe` terminal (not the built-in Windows cmd), and execute the following commands to install Sponge:

```bash
# Install Sponge
go install github.com/zhufuyi/sponge/cmd/sponge@latest

# Initialize Sponge, automatically install Sponge's dependency plugins
sponge init

# Check if all plugins have been successfully installed. If any plugins fail to install, retry with the command: sponge tools --install
sponge tools

# Check Sponge version
sponge -v
```
